DEPARTMENT OF COMPUTER SCIENCE AND
ENGINEERING

DIT983

Domain Specific Languages of Mathematics, 7.5 credits

Matematikens domänspecifika språk, 7,5 högskolepoäng
First Cycle
Confirmation

This course syllabus was confirmed by Department of Computer Science and
Engineering on 2021-11-15 to be valid from 2023-01-16, spring semester of 2023.
Field of education: Science 100%
Department: Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Position in the educational system

The course is offered within the framwork of several degree programmes. The course is
also a single subject course at the University of Gothenburg.
The course can be part of the following programmes: 1) Computer Science, Master's
Programme (N2COS), 2) Mathematical Sciences, Master's Programme (N2MAT), 3)
Applied Data Science Master's Programme (N2ADS), 4) Bachelor's Programme in
Mathematics (N1MAT) and 5) Computer Science, Bachelor's Programme (N1COS)
Main field of studies

Specialization

Computer Science

G2F, First cycle, has at least 60 credits in
first-cycle course/s as entry requirements

Entry requirements

The student should have successfully completed:
- 7.5 hec in discrete mathematics, for example DIT980 Introductory Discrete
Mathematics for Computer Scientists
- 15 hec in mathematics, for example MMGD20 Linear Algebra D and MMGD30
Calculus D
- 15 hec in computer science, for example DIT440 Introduction to Functional
Programming or MVG300 Programming with Matlab and DIT012
Imperative Programming with Basic Object-orientation

2/ 4

Additional 22.5 hec of any mathematics or computer science courses.

** Learning outcomes

On successful completion of the course the student will be able to:
*** Knowledge and understanding

- design and implement a DSL (Domain Specific Language) for a new domain
- organize areas of mathematics in DSL terms
- explain main concepts of elementary real and complex analysis, algebra, and linear
algebra

*** Competence and skills

- develop adequate notation for mathematical concepts
- perform calculational proofs
- use power series for solving differential equations
- use Laplace transforms for solving differential equations

*** Judgement and approach
- discuss and compare different software implementations of mathematical concepts

** Course content

The course will present classical mathematical topics from a computing science
perspective: giving specifications of the concepts introduced, paying
attention to syntax and types, and ultimately constructing DSLs of some
mathematical areas mentioned below.
The lecture topics are:
- Introduction to functional programming and calculational proofs
- Introduction to Domain Specific Languages (DSLs): case study linear algebra
- DSLs and mathematics: case study category theory
- Real analysis: mean value theorems, Taylor formulas
- Real analysis: a DSL for power series
- More linear algebra: eigenvalues and optimization

Sub-courses
1. Written exam (Tentamen), 4 credits
Grading scale: Pass with distinction (5), Pass with credit (4), Pass (3) and Fail (U)
2.

Written Assignments (Inlämningsuppgifter), 3.5 credits
Grading scale: Pass (G) and Fail (U)

Form of teaching

The main forms of instruction are lectures, seminars, case studies and group work

Language of instruction: English

Assessment

The course is examined by an individual written exam which is carried out in an
examination hall at the end of the course and by written assignments carried out in
groups of normally 3-4 students.
If a student, who has failed the same examined component twice, wishes to change
examiner before the next examination, a written application shall be sent to the
department responsible for the course and shall be granted unless there are special
reasons to the contrary (Chapter 6, Section 22 of Higher Education Ordinance).
In cases where a course has been discontinued or has undergone major changes, the
student shall normally be guaranteed at least three examination occasions (including the
ordinary examination) during a period of at least one year from the last time the course
was given.
Grades

The grading scale comprises: Pass with distinction (5), Pass with credit (4), Pass (3) and
Fail (U).
To pass the course, students must receive a passing grade in both modules. The grade
for the entire course will be determined by the written exam.

Course evaluation

The course is evaluated through meetings both during and after the course between
teachers and student representatives. Further, an anonymous questionnaire is used to
ensure written information. The outcome of the evaluations serves to improve the
course by indicating which parts could be added, improved, changed or removed.
The results of and possible changes to the course will be shared with students who
participated in the evaluation and students who are starting the course.

Additional information

The course is a joint course toghether with Chalmers.
Course literature to be announced the latest 8 weeks prior to the start of the course.

DIT983 Domain Specific Languages of Mathematics, 7.5 credits / Matematikens domänspecifika språk, 7,5
högskolepoäng
First Cycle


